Title: A unified machine learning framework for ab initio multiscale modeling of liquids

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20493v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:25:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# A unified machine learning framework for ab initio multiscale modeling of liquids 

Anna T. Bui 1, 2 and Stephen J. Cox 2, ∗

> 1

Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 1EW, United Kingdom 

> 2

Department of Chemistry, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, United Kingdom 

(Dated: March 24, 2026) Understanding and predicting the behavior of liquid matter across length scales—using only the mi-croscopic interactions encoded in the Schr¨ odinger equation—remains a central challenge in the physical sciences. Achieving this goal requires not only an accurate and efficient description of intermolecu-lar forces but also a consistent framework that bridges the micro-, meso-, and macroscales. Here, by combining machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) with neural classical density functional theory (neural cDFT), we present such a framework. The underlying idea is simple: MLIPs trained on quantum-mechanical energies and forces are used to generate inhomogeneous microscopic density profiles, which in turn serve as the training data for neural cDFT. The resulting ab initio neural cDFT is not only significantly more computationally efficient than molecular simulations, but also provides a conceptually transparent route to the thermodynamics of both homogeneous and inhomogeneous systems. We demon-strate the approach for both water and carbon dioxide using several exchange–correlation functionals. Beyond accurately reproducing bulk equations of state and liquid–vapor phase diagrams, ab initio neural cDFT predicts, from first principles, how confinement modifies liquid–vapor coexistence in water. It also captures complex behavior in supercritical carbon dioxide such as the Fisher–Widom and Widom lines. 

Ab initio neural cDFT establishes a general first-principles route to multiscale modeling of fluids within a single unified conceptual framework. 

Liquids play a pivotal role across biology, energy stor-age, catalysis, and environmental science. Their influence ranges from processes at the molecular scale [1–3], where the quantum nature of interatomic interactions is impor-tant, to the nano-, meso-, and macroscopic redistribution of the fluid [4–6], such as near phase transitions. Put sim-ply, comprehensively understanding the behavior of liquids is an inherently multiscale problem. A central goal in chem-ical physics is to predict such multiscale phenomena from first principles, relying solely on knowledge of the under-lying microscopic interactions encoded in the Schr¨ odinger equation [7]. Any genuine multiscale modeling approach needs to faithfully describe both a system’s intermolecular interactions, and its collective behavior. Rooted in the majority of existing multiscale frameworks is the notion of different “levels of theory.” For example, in the case of QM/MM [8] a region where interactions are accurately described by quantum mechanics (QM) is embedded within an environment (e.g., solvent) described by a computationally efficient molecular mechanics (MM) model. Alternatively, the results of accurate ab initio cal-culations can be used to parameterize a coarser description of the system, e.g., by passing reaction energies into a ki-netic model [9]. While such strategies have proven power-ful in contexts such as biochemistry [10] and heterogeneous catalysis [11], how to best combine different levels of theory is not always apparent. In this article, we demonstrate a simple multiscale modeling strategy for liquids that simulta-neously describes micro-, meso-, and macroscale phenom-ena on an equal footing, entirely from first principles. The multiscale framework that we present unifies two areas of physical science in which machine learning (ML) is playing a transformative role. The first of these is machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs). By pro-viding relatively inexpensive surrogate models of a sys-tem’s potential energy surface that would otherwise be ob-tained from costly electronic structure calculations, MLIPs are vastly increasing the efficiency of molecular simula-tions of condensed phases. The second is classical density functional theory (cDFT), an exact statistical mechanical framework for inhomogeneous fluids that, in principle, pro-vides mesoscale insight while retaining microscopic resolu-tion [12, 13]. The development of MLIPs is an avenue of research ac-tively pursued by many research groups [14–19], and is sufficiently advanced that predicting microscopic structure, dynamics, and bulk thermodynamics of fluids has essen-tially become routine [20–25]. Yet, while direct simulation using MLIPs to compute emergent properties such as phase diagrams [26–29], interfacial free energies [2], and adsorp-tion equilibria [30] is possible, doing so comes with a sig-nificant computational burden. Moreover, such simulations are often sensitive to simulation size, slow dynamics asso-ciated with rare events, and largely limited to describing closed systems; standard molecular dynamics (MD) sim-ulations are typically performed with a fixed number of molecules. For systems in equilibrium with a reservoir, as is often the case for adsorption and confinement phenomena, a framework that naturally lends itself to open systems can greatly simplify analysis. To overcome the intrinsic limitations of molecular sim-ulation, we will also leverage recent advances in cDFT, in which, at temperature T , both a fluid’s equilibrium one-body density ȷ(r ) and thermodynamics are obtained by 

> arXiv:2603.20493v1 [physics.chem-ph] 20 Mar 2026

2MD/MC atomistic simulations sample fluid equilibrium states quantum mechanical calculations        

> PS(k)
> Electronic scale Multiscale structure & thermodynamics
> ρ(z)hundreds of nm
> ρ(z)P̃ (H)  TkV ext (z)bulk structure & phase behavior ML interatomic potentials
> E(R3N )
> fi(R3N
> )
> NVT &μVT inhomogeneous on large length scale confined fluid structure and free energy ML classical density functionals
> ĤΨ=EΨ
> Atomistic scale
> a few nm
> ρ(z)

Figure 1: Overview of ab initio neural cDFT. Energies and forces from small-scale electronic structure calculations are used to train an MLIP that represents the potential energy surface, enabling efficient sampling of atomic configurations on nanometer length scales. Equilibrium density profiles obtained from molecular simulations with the MLIP under inhomogeneous external potentials then form the training set for neural cDFT. The resulting ab initio neural cDFT can be used to obtain bulk thermophysical properties, liquid–vapor phase equilibria, and to investigate inhomogeneous systems both on large length scales, and under nanoconfinement. 

minimizing the system’s grand potential functional 

˙V ([ ȷ]; T ) = F(id) intr ([ ȷ]; T ) + F(ex) intr ([ ȷ]; T )+ Rdr ȷ(r ) ( Vext (r ) − —) ; (1) in a single, self-consistent calculation [12, 13]. Inhomo-geneity in ȷ may arise from the external potential Vext , or from the formation of interfaces between phases at coex-istence. The intrinsic Helmholtz free energy functional, which is independent of Vext and the chemical potential —,comprises an ideal part F(id) intr that is known exactly, and an excess part F(ex) intr that arises from intermolecular interac-tions. In direct analogy to the exchange–correlation (xc) func-tional in electronic structure [31], the use of cDFT as a practical tool relies upon accurate approximations to F(ex) intr .Note that, in contrast to the exact xc functional in elec-tronic structure, F(ex) intr is not universal; it depends upon the underlying intermolecular potential and T . For a given intermolecular potential, however, F(ex) intr is unique. While accurate forms of F(ex) intr have been available for hard sphere fluids for decades [32–34], going beyond simple liquids, where hard spheres can act as a suitable reference, has remained a formidable challenge [35–38]. Recent works have shown that ML can be used to learn highly accurate representations of F(ex) intr from molecular simulation data [39–42]. Specifically, Samm¨ uller et al. , in a development dubbed “neural cDFT,” have shown how a neural network can be trained to represent the one-body direct correlation functional [43], 

c(1) (r ; [ ȷ]; T ) = − ‹˛ F(ex) intr ([ ȷ]; T )

‹ȷ (r ) ; (2) where ˛ = 1 =k BT with kB as the Boltzmann constant. Originally applied to hard sphere fluids, where it even out-performed existing approximations, neural cDFT has since been extended to more complex problems, such as liquid– vapor coexistence in the Lennard–Jones fluid [44], liquid– liquid phase separation and azeotropy in binary Lennard– Jones mixtures [45, 46], primitive models of electrolytes [47], and electromechanical phenomena in polar fluids, such as how electric field gradients influence capillarity in water [48]. However, these advances have relied on empirical in-teratomic potentials, leaving cDFT’s potential to predict mesoscopic behavior directly from a first-principles Hamil-tonian untapped. We fill this gap by demonstrating that neural cDFT can be suitably trained with simulation data generated us-ing MLIPs. We do this for two liquids of broad impor-tance: water and carbon dioxide. After validating the resulting ab initio neural cDFT against molecular simula-tions, we use it to straightforwardly investigate phenomena that would be extremely challenging to obtain with tradi-tional computational approaches. Specifically, we investi-gate the influence of confinement on water’s liquid–vapor phase behavior, with a clear thermodynamics prescribed by the grand canonical ensemble. We also compute the fluid phase diagram of carbon dioxide, including the structural crossovers encoded by the Fisher–Widom and Widom lines. A schematic overview of our approach is given in Fig. 1. 3

Constructing ab initio neural cDFT 

Rather than use MLIPs to study the behavior of fluids directly, we instead use their predicted forces to generate equilibrium planar inhomogeneous density profiles ȷeq (z)from relatively small simulations. Specifically, for a given 

T , total number of molecules, and Vext (z) (each chosen randomly), we obtain ȷeq (z) from an MD simulation. The corresponding one-body direct correlation function is given by the Euler–Lagrange equation that results from the vari-ational principle of cDFT [12] 

c(1) (z; [ ȷeq ]; T ) = ln `“−1Λ3ȷeq (z)´ + ˛`Vext (z) − —´; (3) where Λ is the thermal de Broglie wavelength, and “ is an intramolecular partition function; this is necessary as —

couples to the number of molecules rather than atoms [49]. For the remainder of the article, since we only consider the system at equilibrium, we hereinafter drop the “eq” sub-script, such that ȷ refers to the equilibrium density profile. In the original implementations of neural cDFT, many grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) simulations, i.e., those with different, but known, Vext and —, were used to generate a training set by obtaining c(1) (z) directly from Eq. 3. For each discrete value of c(1) (z), treated as the target in the learning procedure, a finite window of neigh-boring points in the corresponding ȷ(z) is passed through a deep neural network to learn the functional dependence on density [43]. The temperature dependence can also be es-tablished by passing T to the neural network [44]. For the MLIPs we use here, however, GCMC is impractical; this is due to both a lack of efficient software packages, and also because insertion moves in GCMC can lead to configura-tions far outside the MLIP training set [50]. We therefore adopt a recent development whereby training data is ob-tained from canonical MD simulations [51], in which both 

c(1) and the set of chemical potentials of the training sim-ulations are learned by the neural network; this is achieved by treating Eq. 3 itself as the loss function (see Methods ). Thus, — is treated as a latent variable in the machine learn-ing problem. As F(ex) intr is not a universal functional, for each fluid and xc functional we must learn c(1) separately. For water, we therefore learn c(1) corresponding to the SCAN [52] and RPBE-D3 [53, 54] functionals, as MLIPs for these have previously been successfully applied to liquid–vapor coex-istence. For the purposes of comparison, we also present results for TIP4P/2005 [55], a popular empirical poten-tial for studying liquid water. In the case of carbon diox-ide, we obtain c(1) for the PBE-D3 [56], BLYP-D3 [57], and SCAN-rVV10 [58] functionals, along with the well-established TraPPE empirical potential [59]. For each xc functional or empirical potential, between 500–1000 training simulations comprising between 20–700 molecules were performed with different random Vext , and across a broad range of T (see Methods ). Representative 

Vext and ȷ(z) used during training are shown in Fig. 2A. Taking advantage of the canonical learning procedure, we also include ȷ(z) from simulations of liquid–vapor coexis-tence (comprising either 832 water molecules or 1536 car-bon dioxide molecules), in which Vext = 0. We employed either DeepMD [15] or HD-NNP [14] for the underlying MLIP architecture (see Methods ), however, we show in Fig. S1 that MACE [16] also provides stable dynamics with the random forms for Vext that we use. 

Validation of ab initio prediction of structure and ther-modynamics 

With a trained neural network representation of c(1) , the equilibrium structure for any given T , Vext , and — is read-ily obtained by self-consistently solving the Euler–Lagrange equation (Eq. 3), rearranged here with ȷ as the object: 

“−1Λ3ȷ(z) = exp ˆ − ˛`Vext (z) − —´ + c(1) (z; [ ȷ]; T )˜: (4) Although ȷ represents a microscopic density field, it is an average quantity; the microscopic degrees of freedom have been integrated out. Accordingly, obtaining the equilib-rium structure of the fluid is significantly less computa-tionally demanding than performing the average explicitly with a molecular simulation. Furthermore, with neural cDFT, F(ex) intr can be obtained by functional line integration of c(1) (see Methods ), and subsequently used to compute the grand potential Ω = ˙V ([ ȷ]; T ). In contrast, obtain-ing free energies from simulations is often an involved, and costly, procedure comprising many intermediate steps (e.g., thermodynamic integration). To give a sense of the compu-tational gains, in what follows, each calculation with neural cDFT that we present takes on the order of a minute on a standard CPU/GPU; in about one hour wall-clock time on a single GPU (see Methods ) we can predict ȷ(z)—with full microscopic resolution—over a ∼ 200 nm extent (see Fig. S2). Where direct comparison to molecular simula-tions is possible, we also show that ab initio neural cDFT is accurate. In this section, we present a selection of re-sults to validate the approach, with a more extensive set of results shown in Figs. S3 and S4. 

Bulk structure and thermodynamics . Beyond its computational efficiency, an appealing feature of cDFT, es-pecially in the context of an ab initio multiscale modeling framework, is its direct access to thermodynamic proper-ties. For example, for a single-component bulk fluid with density ȷb, the pressure can be obtained directly from c(1) 

and F(ex) intr without the need for any self-consistent calcula-tion: 

P (ȷb; T ) = kBT ȷ b

“

1 − c(1) ([ ȷb]; T )

”

− F(ex) intr ([ ȷb]; T )

V :

(5) In Fig. 2B, we show P against ȷb for water at different 

T , described by the RPBE-D3 xc functional. Results are shown both for the neural cDFT using Eq. 5, and directly 4DB

> Bulk structure & thermodynamics
> C
> Phase coexistence Neural cDFT training Confined structure & thermodynamics
> A
> neural cDFT MD simulation

Figure 2: Accurate and efficient description of liquids with ab initio neural cDFT. A: Typical random Vext (z) and corresponding 

ȷ(z) used to train the neural cDFT, as obtained from molecular simulations. Results are shown for both water and carbon dioxide, with several interatomic potentials, as indicated in the legends. B, left: P vs ȷb for RPBE-D3 water along several isotherms. B, right: 

S(k) for PBE-D3 carbon dioxide for different ȷb at T = 360 K. C, top: ȷ(z) at liquid–vapor coexistence for water at T = 500 K (left) and carbon dioxide at T = 250 K (right), for different interatomic potentials. C, bottom: Liquid–vapor binodals for water (left) and carbon dioxide (right) with the different interatomic potentials, as indicated in the legend. D, left: ȷ(z) of SCAN water at different —

confined between graphene sheets. D, right: Effective pressure of TraPPE carbon dioxide at different T , confined between graphene sheets. In B–D, symbols show results from MD simulations and solid lines show results from ab initio neural cDFT. 

from molecular simulations. Not only does the neural cDFT faithfully describe the simulation data, but, at sufficiently low temperatures, exhibits a van der Waals loop. This observation is consistent with a previous neural cDFT study for a Lennard–Jones fluid [44], though in contrast, we have included coexistence simulations directly into the training set. Nonetheless, we expect ab initio neural cDFT—here trained on data from relatively small molecular simulations with MLIPs—to describe liquid–vapor phase equilibria. We explore this point further below. Despite only being trained on planar inhomogeneous den-sity profiles, the bulk structure of the fluid can also be ob-tained from neural cDFT. Specifically, the bulk structure factor is provided by the Ornstein–Zernike equation, 

S(k; ȷb; T ) = 11 − ȷb ˆc(2) r (k; [ ȷb]; T ) ; (6) where ˆ c(2) r is the Fourier transform of the radial two-body direct correlation function of the bulk fluid, c(2) r . The latter is obtained by automatic differentiation of c(1) from neural cDFT, followed by radial projection [43]. Results for S(k) are presented in Fig. 2B for carbon diox-ide described by the PBE-D3 xc functional, at a super-critical temperature T = 360 K. Again, we observe good agreement between the ab initio neural cDFT and results obtained directly from molecular simulations. Note that 

S(k → 0) displays non-monotonic behavior as ȷb is varied. This observation suggests that supercritical carbon dioxide exhibits a maximum in the isothermal compressibility; we explore such supercritical behavior in more detail later in the article. 

Liquid–vapor coexistence . We now consider liquid– vapor phase equilibria. To construct the binodal in the 

ȷb–T plane, we follow a procedure analogous to a direct coexistence simulation. Specifically, for a given T , we find a solution to Eq. 4 with Vext = 0, corresponding to liquid– vapor coexistence, i.e., those with an interface between the two phases; from the resulting density profile, we then simply read the densities corresponding to the bulk liquid and vapor phases. In order to stabilize interfacial solutions, we solve the Euler–Lagrange equation subject to the constraint that the overall density ¯ ȷL = L−1 R L 

> 0

dz ȷ (z) is fixed, where L is 5the length of the system domain in z. Whereas in typi-cal cDFT calculations — is specified as a control variable, here it acts as the Lagrange multiplier that enforces the constraint. For the systems we investigate, this procedure allows us to effectively mimic the canonical ensemble. This approach is similar in spirit to that of Ref. [44], which in-vestigated liquid–vapor coexistence of the Lennard–Jones fluid, though our approach to constraining ¯ ȷL differs. Results for both water and carbon dioxide are presented in Fig. 2C, with L = 20 nm. We also show results from direct coexistence simulations. Overall, we observe excel-lent agreement between the neural DFT and the molecular simulations. Note that cDFT minimization is performed at 1 K intervals across the temperature range, demonstrating the neural cDFT’s ability to interpolate between training data points. From the computed binodals, we estimate the critical point from the empirical law of rectilinear diameters and critical exponents [60], yielding critical temperature Tc

and critical density ȷc.For water, the neural cDFT predictions agree well with previous simulation studies: TIP4P/2005 yields Tc of 657 K (cf. 640 K from Vega et al. [61]), RPBE-D3 gives 584 K [22], and SCAN gives 695 K [62]. For carbon dioxide, we obtain 300 K for TraPPE, 299 K for PBE-D3, 331 K for BLYP-D3, and 343 K for SCAN-rVV10, all consistent with prior molecular simulations [24, 59, 63]. Compared to experiment, for both water (647 K) and carbon dioxide (304 K) [64], the empirical force fields give best agreement. Among the xc functionals investigated, SCAN provides the best agreement for water, and PBE-D3 for carbon dioxide. 

Confined fluids . In the case of liquid–vapor coexis-tence, inhomogeneity arises naturally at the interface be-tween phases. Away from coexistence, external potentials, such as those from confining boundaries, can induce aver-age inhomogeneous structure in the fluid. To demonstrate the ability of ab initio neural cDFT to accurately describe confined fluids, we take Vext as two 9–3 Lennard–Jones po-tentials separated by H, fitted to quantum Monte Carlo data for either a single water or carbon dioxide molecule at a graphene surface [65, 66] (see Methods ). As seen in Fig. 2D, where we show ȷ(z) for confined water described by the SCAN xc functional, ab initio neural cDFT is in excellent agreement with results from molecular dynamics simulations. Note that, in these calculations, we solved the Euler–Lagrange equation (Eq. 4) subject to the constraint that ¯ ȷL matches the canonical simulations, and the reported values for — reflect the resulting Lagrange multiplier; the values of — are not known from the MD simulations. Figure 2D also demonstrates that thermodynamic prop-erties under confinement are well-described. In particular, for supercritical carbon dioxide at T = 400 K, we have computed a measure of the effective pressure—the total force per unit area A exerted by the fluid on the confin-ing walls—from the derivative of the grand potential with respect to separation between the graphene sheets, ˜P ≡ − 1

A

„ @Ω

@H 

«

> A;T;—

= −

Z L

> 0

dz dVwall (z)dz ȷ(z): (7) where the right hand side represents a sum rule [67], with 

Vwall the external potential of a single wall. Following di-rectly from the standard thermodynamic treatment of inho-mogeneous fluids (see SI), the effective pressure ˜ P = P +Π

comprises the bulk pressure and the disjoining pressure Π,i.e., the additional mechanical contribution from the fluid required to maintain the separation H [68]. In order to compare directly against GCMC simulations, results have been obtained with the TraPPE empirical potential. Again, we observe good agreement between the molecular simu-lations and the neural cDFT. Note that the left and right hand sides of Eq. 7 provide two routes to computing ˜P ;here we have presented results using the latter, structural, option; thermodynamic consistency between the two ap-proaches is assessed in Fig. S5. 

Liquid–vapor coexistence of nanoconfined water 

Understanding how confinement influences the behavior of fluids has garnered significant recent interest driven, in part, by advances in fabricating nanofluidic channels [69]. In the case of water, recent experiments have reported a profound impact of extreme confinement on its dielectric properties [70, 71] and capillary behavior [72, 73]. Many groups have also studied nanoconfined water with molec-ular simulations, both with traditional empirical potentials and MLIPs [28, 74–79]. Importantly, not only are molecu-lar simulations used to cast light on experimental findings, they also act as a predictive tool—a prime example is the prediction of new phases under extreme confinement [28]. When dealing with emergent phenomena such as phase behavior, a consistent thermodynamic description is imper-ative to fully maximize the predictive potential of molecular modeling [80]. For typical molecular simulations, however, how to appropriately discuss relevant thermodynamic vari-ables under confinement can be complicated. For example, a common approach for computing pressure under confine-ment is to use the lateral components of the virial pressure tensor [28, 74–76]. For extreme confinement, however, this measure of pressure depends sensitively on the precise def-inition of the separation, which is, to a certain extent, ar-bitrary. In contrast, both P (the pressure of the reservoir) and Π (the disjoining pressure) are insensitive to the precise definition of H, and are readily obtainable within a cDFT formalism. We refer the reader to Ref. 67, and we also provide a brief overview in the SI. Our results in Fig. 2D already demonstrate the capa-bility of ab initio neural cDFT to describe the structure and thermodynamics of confined fluids. We now capital-ize upon both its conceptual and computational advantages to predict, from first principles, how confinement influences 6P

P̃ = P + Π

A B                 

> bulk 1L 5L 4L 3L 2L 3L 2L 4L 5L 1L
> Figure 3: Predicting vapor–liquid equilibria of SCAN water upon confinement between graphene sheets. A: The effective pressure ˜P(see Eq. 7), for a graphene slit pore in equilibrium with a reservoir ( ȷb= 33 nm −3) at different T.˜Pexhibits minima at different H, each corresponding to a different number of water layers, as seen in the accompanying density profiles (the dark shaded regions indicate the positions of the graphene sheets). B: Liquid–vapor phase diagram in the P–Tplane, for the different Hindicated. Note that Pis the bulk pressure of the reservoir.

water’s liquid–vapor coexistence. In Fig. 3A, we present ˜P

vs H for the graphene slit pore in a liquid state in equilib-rium with a reservoir at ȷb = 33 nm −3 at various different 

T . As expected, in all cases we observe lim H→∞ ˜P → P .Strikingly, for H . 2 nm, we observe several local minima; these correspond to slit widths that are commensurate with a particular number of layers of water, as can be seen from visual inspection of the density profiles. While we have shown results for a liquid-like state, under certain conditions, the Euler–Lagrange equation can simul-taneously admit a solution corresponding to a vapor-like state; the stable phase is that with lowest Ω. To con-struct coexistence curves under confinement, we therefore seek, for a given H and T , the value of — at which the vapor- and liquid-like states have equal grand potentials. With molecular simulation, this procedure—systematically varying — to locate phase coexistence across a range of 

H and T —would require either many GCMC simulations, which are impractical with MLIPs [50], or an involved set of free energy calculations. In contrast, with ab initio neu-ral cDFT the entire phase diagram is obtained in minutes. We present the resulting confined liquid–vapor phase dia-gram in Fig. 3B. As the equation of state P (—; T ) is readily obtainable from neural cDFT, to facilitate intuitive under-standing, we present results in the P –T plane. We immediately see from Fig. 3B that, relative to bulk, confinement acts to stabilize the liquid phase. In general, we also observe the critical temperature is shifted down as 

H decreases, in line with expectations from the standard thermodynamic treatment of inhomogeneous fluids [67]. An exception to this trend is the most extreme confinement corresponding to a single layer of water, H ≈ 0:7 nm. As can be deduced from Fig. 3A, even though for a given bulk pressure the liquid is still generally stabilized, under this extreme confinement Π > 0; this indicates that the fluid exerts a repulsive force on the confining graphene sheets. This effect is made more apparent in Fig. S6, where we show the phase diagram in the ˜P –T plane. 

Supercritical crossover lines in carbon dioxide 

So far, we have shown ab initio neural cDFT’s ability to probe liquid–vapor coexistence both in bulk, and under confinement. We now demonstrate its potential to describe the physics of bulk fluids away from coexistence, focus-ing on supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO 2). Understand-ing scCO 2, and supercritical fluids (SCFs) more generally, is not only important from a practical viewpoint—it un-derpins technologies for carbon capture, sustainable power generation, and chemical extraction [81, 82]—but also fun-damentally. For example, fluids under extreme conditions are often encountered deep in the interior of giant “gas” planets, and supercritical fluids are known to exhibit non-trivial thermodynamic and dynamic behavior [83, 84]. Here, we focus on the PBE-D3 xc functional, as we have already established that it reasonably well describes carbon dioxide’s liquid–vapor coexistence. In Fig. 4A, we recast the phase diagram in the P –T plane, where we also compare directly to the experimental result. While small differences between theory and experiment are observed, agreement is overall very good. Turning our attention to the supercritical state, we probe the bulk properties of scCO 2 by analyzing the total correlation function h(r ), whose Fourier transform is related to the two-body direct correlation function of the 7200 300 400 500  

> T[K]
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> P [atm]
> PBE-D3 CO 2

A         

> SCF
> liquid
> gas
> 200 300 400 500
> T[K]
> experiment CO 2
> SCF
> liquid
> gas
> 0510 15
> b[nm 3]
> 250
> 300
> 350
> 400
> T [K]

B        

> Fisher-
> Widom
> max T
> max
> 10 810 7010 710 8
> 1
> T[Pa] coexistence
> Fisher-Widom
> max T
> Widom (max )

Figure 4: Predicting behavior of supercritical PBE-D3 carbon dioxide. A: P –T phase diagram obtained with ab initio neural cDFT (left) and experiment (right) [85–87]; overall, good agreement between the two is observed. B: ȷb–T phase diagram with 

ffl −1 

> T

superimposed as a heat map (see Eq. 9). The Widom line obtained by max ffl T is shown by the dotted line. We also show the Widom line obtained from max ‰, where ‰ is the true correlation length (dashed line). The dot-dashed line shows the Fisher–Widom line, indicating a crossover from simple exponential to oscillatory asymptotic decay of the total correlation function. The Widom and Fisher–Widom lines are also plotted in panel A. 

uniform fluid, via the Ornstein–Zernike equation [12], ˆh(k) = ˆc(2)  

> r

(k)1 − ȷb ˆc(2)  

> r

(k) : (8) For fluids with short-ranged interatomic potentials, it is well established [88] that, for a given temperature, the asymptotic behavior of h(r ) changes from monotonic ex-ponential at low densities, i.e., 

h(r ) ∼ exp( −¸0r );

to oscillatory with an exponential envelope, i.e., 

h(r ) ∼ cos( ˜ ¸1r − „) exp( − ˜¸0r ):

The density at which this crossover occurs is the Fisher– Widom (FW) transition [88, 89], and reflects the com-petition between slowly-varying attractive interactions and rapidly-varying repulsive forces that govern the packing of molecules; the locus of points in the ȷb–T plane at which this transition occurs is the FW line. As determining the FW line requires precise characteri-zation of the long-range behavior of h(r ), it is extremely challenging to obtain from molecular simulation; accurate determination of the asymptotic decay requires system sizes and sampling times that are computationally prohibitive, particularly for ab initio descriptions. Consequently, pre-vious studies have been limited to simple model fluids [88, 90, 91]. With ab initio neural cDFT, the inverse decay lengths, ¸0 and ˜ ¸0, and the period 2 ı= ˜¸1 can be obtained directly from the pole structure of Eq. 8 (also see Meth-ods ); the FW transition is then determined from the density consistent with ¸0 = ˜ ¸0. In Fig. 4B, we plot carbon diox-ide’s FW line in the ȷb–T plane. In line with previous work for the truncated-and-shifted LJ potential [88], we find that the FW line intersects the binodal at T =T c ≈ 0:90 and 

ȷb=ȷ c ≈ 1:93. A complementary description of the supercritical fluid is offered by the “Widom line” [92–95], which was origi-nally defined by the locus of points in the ȷb–T plane of maximum correlation length, though it is typically asso-ciated with maxima in thermodynamic response functions [96–100]. As shown in Ref. [44] for a LJ fluid, the Widom line can be obtained from the maximum in the true cor-relation length ‰ = 1 =¸ 0, which we show in Fig. 4B. We also present the Widom line obtained from the maximum in isothermal compressibility, 

ffl T (ȷb; T ) = ˛ȷb

S(k = 0; ȷb; T ); (9) which deviates from the Widom line obtained from max ‰,in a manner similar to that observed for the LJ fluid. Both sets of Widom lines are also plotted on the P –T phase diagrams in Fig. 4A. In this case, the discrepancy between the two is less pronounced, with the Widom line computed from max ffl T lying slightly below that obtained from max ‰.

Discussion 

In this work, we have introduced ab initio neural cDFT as a simple, first-principles multiscale modeling framework for fluids. A distinctive aspect of ab initio neural cDFT compared to typical multiscale methods is that it treats physics across length scales within the same theoretical framework. In addition to obtaining the equilibrium struc-ture of the fluid, a key appealing feature of the approach is its treatment of thermodynamics, for both homogeneous and inhomogeneous systems. In particular, as neural cDFT 8is formulated in the grand canonical ensemble, the chem-ical potential of the fluid is known, and measures of pres-sure in confined systems are well defined and readily ob-tainable. We capitalized upon this feature to obtain the liquid–vapor coexistence curves of water confined between graphene sheets, with interatomic interactions described by the SCAN xc functional. We also obtained the Fisher– Widom and Widom lines in supercritical carbon dioxide, with interatomic interactions described by the PBE-D3 xc functional; this demonstrates the framework’s ability to even describe bulk properties that would be challenging to obtain from molecular simulations alone. It is important to stress our aim has been to intro-duce a framework that provides accurate predictions of a fluid’s emergent physics equipped only with knowledge of its intermolecular interactions, as determined by the Schr¨ odinger equation; we have not made any attempt to improve the necessary approximations to the many-body electronic structure problem. In this spirit, comparison to experimental data should be viewed as informing on the appropriateness of the underlying interatomic potential for the problem at hand, rather than an assessment of the mul-tiscale framework itself. Whether ab initio neural cDFT can be useful for improving or validating the underlying electronic structure approximation, e.g., by extending vali-dation metrics to more mesoscopic properties, remains an interesting question that lies beyond the scope of the cur-rent study. In the same vein, we have also used MLIPs that are readily available [22, 24, 62], rather than trying to improve their description of the potential energy surface; we have neither generated additional training data, nor developed a new MLIP architecture. This means we have used MLIPs that rely on an atom’s local environment to determine the force acting upon it; explicit electrostatic interactions are missing. For the properties that we have investigated, it is likely that this neglect of long-ranged correlations is not too severe, though we cannot rule out the possibility that the Fisher–Widom line reported in Fig. 4 is an artifact of the local description [101] provided by the MLIP. Clearly, a completely rigorous description ought to take the effects of long-ranged electrostatics explicitly into account, and we note recent progress from several groups in this regard [102–109]. With the assumption that c(1) only depends on nearby values of the density, locality also underpins the machine learning approach used in neural cDFT. Recently, build-ing on ideas from local molecular field theory [110–113], we have shown how the effects of long-ranged electrostat-ics can be accurately accounted for using a well-controlled mean-field approximation [47]; for molecular liquids, this relies on hyper-DFT, an extension of traditional cDFT that permits the description of equilibrium observables [49, 114]. For example, in Fig. S7, we show how the density profile of confined water’s hydrogen atoms can be obtained, in addition to the one-body density prescribed by the oxy-gen atoms. Hyper-DFT also ensures that the framework we present can readily accommodate MLIPs that explicitly treat long-ranged electrostatics [49], and more generally, offers a route to formulating new theoretical descriptions of fluid behavior. For example, we recently used hyper-DFT to investigate how electric field gradients influence the capillarity of dielectric fluids [48]. Aside from the structure of the bulk fluid, the neural cDFT we trained is limited to inhomogeneity in a planar ge-ometry. Recently, neural cDFT has been extended to two-dimensional resolution [115], with the underlying advance-ment seemingly appropriate for a full three-dimensional de-scription. Obtaining the training data in such cases, how-ever, will likely require a significant computational effort. 

Ab initio neural cDFT is also limited to describing the struc-ture and thermodynamics of fluids at equilibrium. For over-damped dynamics, it is possible to apply a similar machine learning approach to non-equilibrium scenarios [116], but the applicability to molecular systems is questionable. Even with these limitations in mind, the results we present make clear that ab initio neural cDFT is in a position to cast light onto the influence of complex microscopic interactions on emergent properties of fluids, and represents a significant advancement in the ab initio multiscale modeling of liquids. Looking forward, one can envisage extending our strat-egy into a fully machine-learned hierarchy spanning mul-tiple physical scales. Recent advances in machine-learned xc functionals [117–119] could provide electronic structure data from which MLIPs are derived, which in turn generate the data used to construct neural cDFT. Such a pipeline would constitute a unified, fully machine-learned multi-scale framework linking electronic structure to the emer-gent physics of liquids. 

Data Availability 

Data and code supporting the findings of this study will be openly available upon publication of the manuscript. 

Supporting information 

Supporting information includes simulations, machine learning details and additional supporting results. 

Acknowledgements 

Via membership of the United Kingdom Car Parrinello (UKCP) consortium (Grant No. EP/F036884/1) and of the UKs HEC Materials Chemistry Consortium funded by EPSRC (EP/X035859), this work used the ARCHER2 UK National Supercomputing Service. A.T.B. acknowledges funding from the Oppenheimer Fund and Peterhouse Col-lege, University of Cambridge. S.J.C. is a Royal Society 9University Research Fellow (Grant No. URF \R1 \211144) at Durham University. 

Author contributions 

A.T.B.: Conceptualization (equal); Investigation (equal); Writing - original draft (equal); Writing - review & editing (equal). S.J.C.: Conceptualization (equal); Inves-tigation (equal); Writing - original draft (equal); Writing -review & editing (equal) 

Methods 

Machine-learned interatomic potentials. For carbon diox-ide, the training datasets for energies and forces were taken from Ref. [24]. We considered three xc functionals: PBE [56], BLYP [57] with D3 dispersion corrections [54], and SCAN-rVV10 [52, 58]. For each xc functional we trained an MLIP using the DeepMD architecture with the DeePMD-kit package [120], minimizing the loss function 

L = pEnX

> k=1

˛˛˛Eref (RNk ) − E(RNk )

˛˛˛2

+ pfnX

> k=1
> N

X

> i=1

˛˛˛˛˛˛f i; ref (RNk ) − f i (RNk )

˛˛˛˛˛˛2

;

where pE and pf are tunable parameters that varied during the optimization, RNk is the kth atomic configuration in the training set with atomic forces f i; ref (RNk ) and energy Eref (RNk ), while 

f i (RNk ) and energy E(RNk ) are the corresponding model predic-tions ( i = 1 : : : N indexes the atoms). For reasons of computa-tional efficiency, we employed DeepMD for the carbon dioxide MLIPs used in the main article. However, we also trained an MLIP for PBE-D3 carbon dioxide using MACE to show the ro-bustness of the method to different MLIP architectures (see Fig. S1). For water, we considered two xc functionals: RPBE [53] with D3 dispersion corrections, and SCAN. For RPBE-D3 water, we used the MLIP trained in Ref. [22] based upon the HD-NNP architecture. For SCAN water, we used the MLIP trained in Ref. [62] based upon the DeepMD architecture. 

Generation of training data for neural cDFT. To obtain train-ing data for the neural network representations of c(1) (z; [ ȷ]; T ), for each fluid and intermolecular potential we performed MD simulations under random Vext of the form [43] 

Vext (z) = 

> 4

X

> n=1

An sin 

„ 2ınz Lz

+ „n

«

+

> 4

X

> n=1

Blin  

> n

(z)where Lz is the simulation box length in the z direction. The phases „n were chosen uniformly in the interval [0, 2 ı), and values of An were drawn from an unbiased normal distribution with variance of 0 :4 ( kBT )2. The second summation denotes up to four piecewise linear functions 

Blin  

> n

(z) = 

8<:

V1 + V2 − V1

z2 − z1

(z − z1) z1 < z < z 2

0 otherwise ;

with 0 < z 1 < z 2 < L z . The locations z1 and z2 were distributed uniformly while V1 and V2 were chosen randomly from an un-biased normal distribution with variance of 0 :8 ( kBT )2. From these randomized Vext , the external force fext (z) = −@z Vext (z)was obtained by finite difference and added to the molecular centers (i.e., the carbon atom for carbon dioxide, and the oxy-gen atom for water). In some cases, planar walls of the form of a 9-3 Lennard–Jones potential, 

Vwall (z) = ›wall 

"

215 

„ ff wall 

z

«9

−

„ ff wall 

z

«3#

were also included, with ›wall ∈ [0 :02, 2] kBT and ff wall ∈

[0 :1; 0:3] nm. Simulations cells of size 3 :332 × 3:332 × 3:332 nm 3 for carbon dioxide and 2 :000 × 2:000 × 4:000 nm 3 for water were used, and periodic boundary conditions were employed. MD simu-lations were performed in the canonical ensemble, from which the density profiles were sampled after a least 1 ns of produc-tion run. The number of molecules in the box was random-ized between 70–512 for carbon dioxide and 40–1024 for water. For TraPPE carbon dioxide, the linear molecules are evolved as rigid bodies [121]. For TIP4P/2005 water, the geometries of the water molecules were constrained using the RATTLE al-gorithm [122]. Dynamics were propagated using the velocity Verlet algorithm with a time-step of 0.5 fs. The temperature, chosen randomly between 220 − 500 K for carbon dioxide and 450 − 950 K for water, was maintained using a Nos´ e–Hoover thermostat [123, 124]. We used the LAMMPS simulation package [125] interfaced with the n2p2 package [126] for the HD-NNP potential and the DeepMD-kit package for the DeepMD po-tentials. Overall, for each fluid and interatomic potential, we sampled 500 − 1000 simulations to generate the training data for neural cDFT. We also performed direct coexistence MD simulations with sim-ulation cell sizes 3 :332 × 3:332 × 20 :000 nm 3 for carbon dioxide (comprising 1536 molecules) and 2 :000 ×2:000 ×20 :000 nm 3 for water (comprising 832 molecules). For each interatomic poten-tial, approximately 20 simulations were performed at random T

from 220 K up to Tc for carbon dioxide, and from 450 K up to 

Tc for water. Density profiles were obtained after at least 1 ns production run. 

Training neural cDFT . To learn c(1) ([ ȷ]; T ) for each fluid and interatomic potential, we employed a local learning strategy de-tailed elsewhere [43, 51]. In brief, inputs consisted of local density in a sliding spatial window of size 1 nm from the center of the position of interest, along with a separate input node that encodes T as a scalar. The loss function is defined based on Eq. 4 as 

L =

> n

X

> k=1

˛˛˛˛˛˛ln `“−1Λ3ȷk (z)´ + ˛k V (k)ext (z) − ˛k —k − c(1) ([ ȷk ]; T k )

˛˛˛˛˛˛2

where k indexes each simulation in the dataset. Note that, as we have used canonical MD simulations to generate our training data, {—k } are treated as latent variables that are learned during the training procedure. In practice, we set “−1Λ3 = 1. The machine learning routine was implemented in Keras/Tensorflow [127]. One fifth of the dataset was used for validation, and the rest was used for training. Models were trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 128, using an exponentially decaying learning rate starting at 0.001, achieving 10 

errors comparable to the estimated simulation noise. The network contains three fully-connected layers, each containing 128, 64 and 32 nodes respectively, with softplus activation. The training of the neural networks was done on a GPU (NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 ) in a few hours. 

Evaluating neural cDFT. Evaluating the trained neural func-tionals is fast ( ∼ milliseconds) and can be performed on a CPU or GPU. The EL equation was solved self-consistently with a mixed Picard iteration scheme, which typically converges within minutes. When constraining ¯ ȷL, — acts as the Lagrange multi-plier, which is achieved by a primal–dual gradient scheme. To obtain the Widom and Fisher–Widom lines, a pole analysis was performed following Refs. [44, 88], i.e., by finding the zeros of the denominator 1 − ȷˆc(2) r (¸) in Eq. 6. Here, ¸(ȷb; T ) = 

¸1 + i¸ 0, with ¸0 and ¸1 satisfying 1 = 4 ıȷ b

Z ∞

> 0

dr r 2c(2) r (r ; [ ȷb]; T ) sinh( ¸0r )

¸0r cos( ¸1r );

1 = 4 ıȷ b

Z ∞

> 0

dr r 2c(2) r (r ; [ ȷb]; T ) cosh( ¸0r ) sin( ¸1r )

¸1r :

Validation simulations. For the simulation data in Fig. 2, to obtain the pressure and structure factors, we performed simu-lations of the bulk fluid with simulations cells 3 :332 × 3:332 ×

3:32 nm 3 for carbon dioxide, and 2 :000 × 2:000 × 2:000 nm 3

for water. Direct coexistence simulations were performed as described above (see Generation of training data for neural cDFT ). For simulations of the confined fluids, we employed Lennard–Jones 9-3 walls (with a 1 nm cutoff), separated by 

H. To avoid interactions between periodic images, the box dimension Lz was chosen such that Lz − H = 4 nm. The wall–fluid interaction parameters were obtained by fitting to quantum Monte Carlo data [65, 66], yielding ›wall = 0 :1298 eV, 

ff wall = 0 :3868 nm for carbon dioxide and ›wall = 0 :0829 eV, 

ff wall = 0 :3590 nm for water. When benchmarking the disjoin-ing pressure of TraPPE carbon dioxide, we performed GCMC simulations with our own code [128].  

> ∗

stephen.j.cox@durham.ac.uk [1] P. L. Geissler, C. Dellago, D. Chandler, J. Hutter, and M. Parrinello, Autoionization in liquid water, Science 291 ,2121 (2001). [2] C. Zhang, Z. Yu, R. Car, and A. Selloni, Tuning water dissociation at oxide–electrolyte interfaces with electric fields, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 122 , e2505929122 (2025). [3] H. Zhang, V. Juraskova, and F. Duarte, Modelling chem-ical processes in explicit solvents with machine learning potentials, Nat. Commun 15 , 6114 (2024). [4] S. Perkin, T. Albrecht, and J. Klein, Layering and shear properties of an ionic liquid, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium ethylsulfate, confined to nano-films between mica sur-faces, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12 , 1243 (2010). [5] X. Zhang, H. Zhao, J. R. Panter, G. McHale, G. G. Wells, R. Ledesma-Aguilar, and H. Kusumaatmaja, Mul-tiple equilibria enables tunable wetting of droplets on pat-terned liquid surfaces, Sci. Adv. 11 , eadw6615 (2026). [6] M. Liu, S. Wang, and L. Jiang, Nature-inspired superwet-tability systems, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2, 17036 (2017). [7] R. Radhakrishnan, A survey of multiscale modeling: Foun-dations, historical milestones, current status, and future prospects, AIChE J. 67 , e17026 (2021). [8] M. J. Field, P. A. Bash, and M. Karplus, A combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical potential for molecular dynamics simulations, J. Comput. Chem 11 ,700 (1990). [9] K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, First-principles kinetic Monte Carlo simulations for heterogeneous catalysis: Applica-tion to the CO oxidation at RuO 2(110), Phys. Rev. B 73 ,045433 (2006). [10] M. Karplus and J. A. McCammon, Molecular dynamics simulations of biomolecules, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol 9, 646 (2002). [11] A. Bruix, J. T. Margraf, M. Andersen, and K. Reuter, First-principles-based multiscale modelling of heteroge-neous catalysis, Nat. Catal 2, 659 (2019). [12] J. Hansen and I. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liquids: with Applications to Soft Matter (Elsevier Science, 2013). [13] R. Evans, The nature of the liquid-vapour interface and other topics in the statistical mechanics of non-uniform, classical fluids, Adv. Phys 28 , 143 (1979). [14] J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Generalized neural-network representation of high-dimensional potential-energy sur-faces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 , 146401 (2007). [15] L. Zhang, J. Han, H. Wang, R. Car, and W. E, Deep potential molecular dynamics: A scalable model with the accuracy of quantum mechanics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 ,143001 (2018). [16] I. Batatia, D. P. Kovacs, G. Simm, C. Ortner, and G. Csanyi, MACE: Higher order equivariant message pass-ing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields, in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , Vol. 35, edited by S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (Curran Associates, Inc., 2022) pp. 11423– 11436. [17] B. M. Wood, M. Dzamba, X. Fu, M. Gao, M. Shuaibi, L. Barroso-Luque, K. Abdelmaqsoud, V. Gharakhanyan, J. R. Kitchin, D. S. Levine, K. Michel, A. Sriram, T. Co-hen, A. Das, A. Rizvi, S. J. Sahoo, Z. W. Ulissi, and C. L. Zitnick, UMA: A family of universal models for atoms (2025), arXiv:2506.23971 [cs.LG]. [18] B. Rhodes, S. Vandenhaute, V. imkus, J. Gin, J. Godwin, T. Duignan, and M. Neumann, Orb-v3: atomistic simu-lation at scale (2025), arXiv:2504.06231 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. [19] A. Mazitov, F. Bigi, M. Kellner, P. Pegolo, D. Tisi, G. Fraux, S. Pozdnyakov, P. Loche, and M. Ceriotti, Pet-mad as a lightweight universal interatomic potential for advanced materials modeling, Nat. Commun. 16 , 10653 (2025). [20] C. Schran, F. L. Thiemann, P. Rowe, E. A. M¨ uller, O. Marsalek, and A. Michaelides, Machine learning po-tentials for complex aqueous systems made simple, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 118 , e2110077118 (2021). [21] B. Cheng, E. A. Engel, J. Behler, C. Dellago, and M. Ce-riotti, Ab initio thermodynamics of liquid and solid water, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 116 , 1110 (2019). [22] O. Wohlfahrt, C. Dellago, and M. Sega, Ab initio struc-ture and thermodynamics of the RPBE-D3 water/vapor interface by neural-network molecular dynamics, J. Chem. Phys 153 , 144710 (2020). 11 

[23] C. Zhang, S. Yue, A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, M. L. Klein, and X. Wu, Dissolving salt is not equivalent to applying a pressure on water, Nat. Commun. 13 , 822 (2022). [24] R. Mathur, M. C. Muniz, S. Yue, R. Car, and A. Z. Pana-giotopoulos, First-principles-based machine learning mod-els for phase behavior and transport properties of CO 2, J. Phys. Chem. B 127 , 4562 (2023). [25] I.-B. Magd˘ au, D. J. Arismendi-Arrieta, H. E. Smith, C. P. Grey, K. Hermansson, and G. Cs´ anyi, Machine learn-ing force fields for molecular liquids: Ethylene carbon-ate/ethyl methyl carbonate binary solvent, npj Comput. Mater. 9, 146 (2023). [26] H. Zong, H. Wiebe, and G. J. Ackland, Understand-ing high pressure molecular hydrogen with a hierarchi-cal machine-learned potential, Nat. Commun. 11 , 5014 (2020). [27] A. Reinhardt and B. Cheng, Quantum-mechanical explo-ration of the phase diagram of water, Nat. Commun 12 ,588 (2021). [28] V. Kapil, C. Schran, A. Zen, J. Chen, C. J. Pickard, and A. Michaelides, The first-principles phase diagram of monolayer nanoconfined water, Nature 609 , 512 (2022). [29] S. Menon, Y. Lysogorskiy, A. L. M. Knoll, N. Leimeroth, M. Poul, M. Qamar, J. Janssen, M. Mrovec, J. Rohrer, K. Albe, J. Behler, R. Drautz, and J. Neugebauer, From electrons to phase diagrams with machine learning poten-tials using pyiron based automated workflows, npj Com-put. Mater. 10 , 261 (2024). [30] R. Goeminne and V. Van Speybroeck, Ab initio predic-tions of adsorption in flexible metal–organic frameworks for water harvesting applications, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 147 ,3615 (2025). [31] W. Kohn, Nobel lecture: Electronic structure of matter— wave functions and density functionals, Rev. Mod. Phys. 

71 , 1253 (1999). [32] Y. Rosenfeld, Free-energy model for the inhomogeneous hard-sphere fluid mixture and density-functional theory of freezing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 , 980 (1989). [33] R. Roth, R. Evans, A. Lang, and G. Kahl, Fundamental measure theory for hard-sphere mixtures revisited: the White Bear version, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 14 , 12063 (2002). [34] R. Roth, Fundamental measure theory for hard-sphere mixtures: a review, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 22 , 063102 (2010). [35] Y. Tang and J. Wu, Modeling inhomogeneous van der waals fluids using an analytical direct correlation function, Phys. Rev. E 70 , 011201 (2004). [36] G. Jeanmairet, M. Levesque, R. Vuilleumier, and D. Bor-gis, Molecular density functional theory of water, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 4, 619 (2013). [37] A. J. Archer, B. Chacko, and R. Evans, The standard mean-field treatment of inter-particle attraction in classi-cal dft is better than one might expect, J. Chem. Phys. 

147 , 034501 (2017). [38] G. Jeanmairet, L. Belloni, and D. Borgis, A molecular density functional theory of aqueous electrolytic solution, J. Chem. Phys. 164 , 104104 (2026). [39] A. Simon, L. Belloni, D. Borgis, and M. Oettel, The orien-tational structure of a model patchy particle fluid: Simu-lations, integral equations, density functional theory, and machine learning, J. Chem. Phys. 162 , 034503 (2025). [40] J. Dijkman, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij, M. Welling, J.-W. van de Meent, and B. Ensing, Learning neural free-energy functionals with pair-correlation matching, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134 , 056103 (2025). [41] J. Yang, R. Pan, J. Sun, and J. Wu, High-dimensional operator learning for molecular density functional theory, J. Chem. Theory Comput 21 , 5905 (2025). [42] A. Simon and M. Oettel, Machine learning approaches to classical density functional theory, in Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Matter: Nanoscience, Soft Matter, Philos-ophy , edited by M. te Vrugt (Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2026) pp. 83–113. [43] F. Samm¨ uller, S. Hermann, D. de las Heras, and M. Schmidt, Neural functional theory for inhomogeneous fluids: Fundamentals and applications, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 120 , e2312484120 (2023). [44] F. Samm¨ uller, M. Schmidt, and R. Evans, Neural density functional theory of liquid-gas phase coexistence, Phys. Rev. X 15 , 011013 (2025). [45] S. Robitschko, F. Samm¨ uller, M. Schmidt, and R. Evans, Learning the bulk and interfacial physics of liquid–liquid phase separation with neural density functionals, J. Chem. Phys 163 , 161101 (2025). [46] K. L. Y. Zhou, A. T. Bui, and S. J. Cox, Disentangling the roles of bulk and surface phenomena in azeotropic mixture separation fluids (2026), arXiv:2601.21591. [47] A. T. Bui and S. J. Cox, Learning classical density func-tionals for ionic fluids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134 , 148001 (2025). [48] A. T. Bui and S. J. Cox, Dielectrocapillarity for exquisite control of fluids, Nat. Commun. 10.1038/s41467-026-69482-1 (2026). [49] A. T. Bui and S. J. Cox, A first-principles approach to electromechanics in liquids, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 

37 , 285101 (2025). [50] R. Goeminne, L. Vanduyfhuys, V. Van Speybroeck, and T. Verstraelen, DFT-quality adsorption simulations in metal–organic frameworks enabled by machine learning potentials, J. Chem. Theory Comput 19 , 6313 (2023). [51] F. Samm¨ uller and M. Schmidt, Determining the chemical potential via universal density functional learning, Phys. Rev. Lett. 136 , 068202 (2026). [52] J. Sun, A. Ruzsinszky, and J. P. Perdew, Strongly con-strained and appropriately normed semilocal density func-tional, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 , 036402 (2015). [53] B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen, and J. K. Nørskov, Improved adsorption energetics within density-functional theory us-ing revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functionals, Phys. Rev. B 59 , 7413 (1999). [54] S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, and H. Krieg, A con-sistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 ele-ments H-Pu, J. Chem. Phys 132 , 154104 (2010). [55] J. L. F. Abascal and C. Vega, A general purpose model for the condensed phases of water: TIP4P/2005, J. Chem. Phys 123 , 234505 (2005). [56] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 ,3865 (1996). [57] A. D. Becke, Density-functional exchange-energy approx-imation with correct asymptotic behavior, Phys. Rev. A 

38 , 3098 (1988). [58] H. Peng, Z.-H. Yang, J. P. Perdew, and J. Sun, Versa-tile van der Waals density functional based on a meta-generalized gradient approximation, Phys. Rev. X 6,041005 (2016). 12 

[59] J. J. Potoff and J. I. Siepmann, Vapor–liquid equilibria of mixtures containing alkanes, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen, AIChE J. 47 , 1676 (2001). [60] J. Rowlinson and B. Widom, Molecular Theory of Cap-illarity , Dover books on chemistry (Dover Publications, 2002). [61] C. Vega, J. L. F. Abascal, and I. Nezbeda, Vapor-liquid equilibria from the triple point up to the critical point for the new generation of TIP4P-like models: TIP4P/Ew, TIP4P/2005, and TIP4P/ice, J. Chem. Phys 125 , 034503 (2006). [62] I. Sanchez-Burgos, M. C. Muniz, J. R. Espinosa, and A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, A deep potential model for liquid–vapor equilibrium and cavitation rates of water, J. Chem. Phys 

158 , 184504 (2023). [63] H. Goel, Z. W. Windom, A. A. Jackson, and N. Rai, Per-formance of density functionals for modeling vapor liquid equilibria of CO 2 and SO 2, J. Comput. Chem 39 , 397 (2018). [64] P. J. Linstrom and W. G. Mallard, NIST chemistry web-book, NIST standard reference database number 69, Na-tional Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithers-burg, MD 20899 (2026), retrieved March 20, 2026. [65] J. G. Brandenburg, A. Zen, M. Fitzner, B. Ramberger, G. Kresse, T. Tsatsoulis, A. Gr¨ uneis, A. Michaelides, and D. Alf` e, Physisorption of water on graphene: Subchemical accuracy from many-body electronic structure methods, J. Phys. Chem. Lett 10 , 358 (2019). [66] F. Della Pia, G. Kler-Young, A. Zen, F. Berger, D. Alf` e, and A. Michaelides, Interaction strength of carbon diox-ide on graphene from periodic quantum diffusion Monte Carlo, J. Chem. Phys 163 , 071101 (2025). [67] R. Evans and U. Marini Bettolo Marconi, Phase equilibria and solvation forces for fluids confined between parallel walls, J. Chem. Phys 86 , 7138 (1987). [68] N. Churaev, B. Derjaguin, and V. Muller, Surface Forces ,Chemistry and Materials Science (Springer US, 2013). [69] B. Radha, A. Esfandiar, F. C. Wang, A. P. Rooney, K. Gopinadhan, A. Keerthi, A. Mishchenko, A. Ja-nardanan, P. Blake, L. Fumagalli, M. Lozada-Hidalgo, S. Garaj, S. J. Haigh, I. V. Grigorieva, H. A. Wu, and A. K. Geim, Molecular transport through capillaries made with atomic-scale precision, Nature 538 , 222 (2016). [70] L. Fumagalli, A. Esfandiar, R. Fabregas, S. Hu, P. Ares, A. Janardanan, Q. Yang, B. Radha, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, G. Gomila, K. S. Novoselov, and A. K. Geim, Anomalously low dielectric constant of confined wa-ter, Science 360 , 1339 (2018). [71] R. Wang, M. Souilamas, A. Esfandiar, R. Fabregas, S. Be-naglia, H. Nevison-Andrews, Q. Yang, J. Normansell, P. Ares, G. Ferrari, A. Principi, A. K. Geim, and L. Fu-magalli, In-plane dielectric constant and conductivity of confined water, Nature 646 , 606 (2025). [72] Q. Yang, P. Z. Sun, L. Fumagalli, Y. V. Stebunov, S. J. Haigh, Z. W. Zhou, I. V. Grigorieva, F. C. Wang, and A. K. Geim, Capillary condensation under atomic-scale confinement, Nature 588 , 250 (2020). [73] A. Zou, S. Poudel, M. Gupta, and S. C. Maroo, Disjoining pressure of water in nanochannels, Nano Lett 21 , 7769 (2021). [74] S. Han, M. Y. Choi, P. Kumar, and H. E. Stanley, Phase transitions in confined water nanofilms, Nat. Phys. 6, 685 (2010). [75] D. Takaiwa, I. Hatano, K. Koga, and H. Tanaka, Phase diagram of water in carbon nanotubes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 105 , 39 (2008). [76] G. Algara-Siller, O. Lehtinen, F. C. Wang, R. R. Nair, U. Kaiser, H. A. Wu, A. K. Geim, and I. V. Grigorieva, Square ice in graphene nanocapillaries, Nature 519 , 443 (2015). [77] A. T. Bui, F. L. Thiemann, A. Michaelides, and S. J. Cox, Classical quantum friction at water–carbon inter-faces, Nano Lett 23 , 580 (2023). [78] A. T. Bui and S. J. Cox, Revisiting the Green–Kubo re-lation for friction in nanofluidics, J. Chem. Phys. 161 ,201102 (2024). [79] F. L. Thiemann, C. Schran, P. Rowe, E. A. M¨ uller, and A. Michaelides, Water flow in single-wall nanotubes: Oxy-gen makes it slip, hydrogen makes it stick, ACS Nano 16 ,10775 (2022). [80] P. Y. Chew and A. Reinhardt, Phase diagrams—why they matter and how to predict them, J. Chem. Phys. 158 ,030902 (2023). [81] M. T. White, G. Bianchi, L. Chai, S. A. Tassou, and A. I. Sayma, Review of supercritical CO 2 technologies and sys-tems for power generation, Appl. Therm. Eng 185 , 116447 (2021). [82] K.-Y. Hsiao, R.-J. Chung, C.-F. Chen, P.-P. Chang, and T.-H. Tsai, Review on supercritical carbon dioxide in en-ergy storage systems: Advances and outlook, Energy Fu-els 39 , 12289 (2025). [83] D. Pan, L. Spanu, B. Harrison, D. A. Sverjensky, and G. Galli, Dielectric properties of water under extreme con-ditions and transport of carbonates in the deep earth, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110 , 6646 (2013). [84] D. Pan and G. Galli, The fate of carbon dioxide in water-rich fluids under extreme conditions, Sci. Adv. 2,e1601278 (2016). [85] R. Span and W. Wagner, A new equation of state for carbon dioxide covering the fluid region from the triple-point temperature to 1100 K at pressures up to 800 MPa, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 25 , 1509 (1996). [86] J. Proctor, The Liquid and Supercritical Fluid States of Matter (CRC Press, 2020). [87] P. J. Linstrom and W. G. Mallard, NIST Chemistry Web-Book, NIST Standard Reference Database Number 69, 

https://doi.org/10.18434/T4D303 (2025), National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg MD, 20899. Retrieved October 29, 2025. [88] R. Evans, J. R. Henderson, D. C. Hoyle, A. O. Parry, and Z. A. Sabeur, Asymptotic decay of liquid structure: oscillatory liquid-vapour density profiles and the Fisher-Widom line, Mol. Phys. 80 , 755 (1993). [89] M. E. Fisher and B. Widom, Decay of correlations in linear systems, J. Chem. Phys 50 , 3756 (1969). [90] C. Vega, L. F. Rull, and S. Lago, Location of the Fisher-Widom line for systems interacting through short-ranged potentials, Phys. Rev. E 51 , 3146 (1995). [91] M. Dijkstra and R. Evans, A simulation study of the decay of the pair correlation function in simple fluids, J. Chem. Phys 112 , 1449 (2000). [92] G. G. Simeoni, T. Bryk, F. A. Gorelli, M. Krisch, G. Ruocco, M. Santoro, and T. Scopigno, The Widom line as the crossover between liquid-like and gas-like be-haviour in supercritical fluids, Nat. Phys. 6, 503 (2010). [93] L. Xu, P. Kumar, S. V. Buldyrev, S.-H. Chen, P. H. Poole, F. Sciortino, and H. E. Stanley, Relation between the 13 

Widom line and the dynamic crossover in systems with a liquid–liquid phase transition, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 102 , 16558 (2005). [94] P. Gallo, D. Corradini, and M. Rovere, Widom line and dynamical crossovers as routes to understand supercritical water, Nat. Commun 5, 5806 (2014). [95] P. F. McMillan and H. E. Stanley, Going supercritical, Nat. Phys. 6, 479 (2010). [96] Y. D. Fomin, V. N. Ryzhov, E. N. Tsiok, and V. V. Brazhkin, Thermodynamic properties of supercritical car-bon dioxide: Widom and Frenkel lines, Phys. Rev. E 91 ,022111 (2015). [97] F. Gorelli, M. Santoro, T. Scopigno, M. Krisch, and G. Ruocco, Liquidlike behavior of supercritical fluids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 , 245702 (2006). [98] V. Pipich and D. Schwahn, Densification of supercritical carbon dioxide accompanied by droplet formation when passing the Widom line, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 , 145701 (2018). [99] X. Li and Y. Jin, Thermodynamic crossovers in supercriti-cal fluids, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 121 , e2400313121 (2024). [100] C. Cockrell, V. V. Brazhkin, and K. Trachenko, Transition in the supercritical state of matter: Review of experimen-tal evidence, Phys. Rep 941 , 1 (2021). [101] R. J. F. L. de Carvalho, R. Evans, D. C. Hoyle, and J. R. Henderson, The decay of the pair correlation function in simple fluids: long- versus short-ranged potentials, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 6, 9275 (1994). [102] S. Yue, M. C. Muniz, M. F. Calegari Andrade, L. Zhang, R. Car, and A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, When do short-range atomistic machine-learning models fall short?, J. Chem. Phys. 154 , 034111 (2021). [103] S. P. Niblett, M. Galib, and D. T. Limmer, Learning in-termolecular forces at liquid–vapor interfaces, J. Chem. Phys. 155 , 164101 (2021). [104] A. Gao and R. C. Remsing, Self-consistent determination of long-range electrostatics in neural network potentials, Nat. Commun 13 , 1572 (2022). [105] L. Zhang, H. Wang, M. C. Muniz, A. Z. Panagiotopou-los, R. Car, and W. E, A deep potential model with long-range electrostatic interactions, J. Chem. Phys 156 ,124107 (2022). [106] T. W. Ko, J. A. Finkler, S. Goedecker, and J. Behler, A fourth-generation high-dimensional neural network poten-tial with accurate electrostatics including non-local charge transfer, Nat. Commun 12 , 398 (2021). [107] Y. Ji, J. Liang, and Z. Xu, Machine-learning interatomic potentials for long-range systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 135 ,178001 (2025). [108] B. Cheng, Latent Ewald summation for machine learning of long-range interactions, npj Comput. Mater. 11 , 80 (2025). [109] I. Batatia, W. J. Baldwin, D. Kuryla, J. Hart, E. Ka-soar, A. M. Elena, H. Moore, M. J. Gawkowski, B. X. Shi, V. Kapil, P. Kourtis, I.-B. Magd˘ au, and G. Cs´ anyi, MACE-POLAR-1: A polarisable electrostatic foundation model for molecular chemistry (2026), arXiv:2602.19411 [physics.chem-ph]. [110] J. M. Rodgers and J. D. Weeks, Local molecular field the-ory for the treatment of electrostatics, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 20 , 494206 (2008). [111] J. M. Rodgers and J. D. Weeks, Interplay of local hydrogen-bonding and long-ranged dipolar forces in sim-ulations of confined water, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 

105 , 19136 (2008). [112] R. C. Remsing, S. Liu, and J. D. Weeks, Long-ranged contributions to solvation free energies from theory and short-ranged models, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 113 ,2826 (2016). [113] S. J. Cox, Dielectric response with short-ranged electro-statics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 117 , 19746 (2020). [114] F. Samm¨ uller, S. Robitschko, S. Hermann, and M. Schmidt, Hyperdensity functional theory of soft mat-ter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 133 , 098201 (2024). [115] F. Glitsch, J. Weimar, and M. Oettel, Neural density func-tional theory in higher dimensions with convolutional lay-ers, Phys. Rev. E 111 , 055305 (2025). [116] T. Zimmermann, F. Samm¨ uller, S. Hermann, M. Schmidt, and D. de las Heras, Neural force functional for non-equilibrium many-body colloidal systems, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 5, 035062 (2024). [117] J. Kirkpatrick, B. McMorrow, D. H. P. Turban, A. L. Gaunt, J. S. Spencer, A. G. D. G. Matthews, A. Obika, L. Thiry, M. Fortunato, D. Pfau, L. R. Castellanos, S. Pe-tersen, A. W. R. Nelson, P. Kohli, P. Mori-S´ anchez, D. Hassabis, and A. J. Cohen, Pushing the frontiers of density functionals by solving the fractional electron prob-lem, Science 374 , 1385 (2021). [118] R. Pederson, B. Kalita, and K. Burke, Machine learn-ing and density functional theory, Nat. Rev. Phys. 4, 357 (2022). [119] G. Luise, C.-W. Huang, T. Vogels, D. P. Kooi, S. Ehlert, S. Lanius, K. J. H. Giesbertz, A. Karton, D. Gunceler, M. Stanley, W. P. Bruinsma, L. Huang, X. Wei, J. G. Torres, A. Katbashev, R. C. Zavaleta, B. Mt, S.-O. Kaba, R. Sordillo, Y. Chen, D. B. Williams-Young, C. M. Bishop, J. Hermann, R. van den Berg, and P. Gori-Giorgi, Accu-rate and scalable exchange-correlation with deep learning (2026), arXiv:2506.14665 [physics.chem-ph]. [120] H. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Han, and W. E, DeePMD-kit: A deep learning package for many-body potential energy representation and molecular dynamics, Comput. Phys. Commun 228 , 178 (2018). [121] T. F. Miller III, M. Eleftheriou, P. Pattnaik, A. Ndi-rango, D. Newns, and G. J. Martyna, Symplectic quater-nion scheme for biophysical molecular dynamics, J. Chem. Phys. 116 , 8649 (2002). [122] H. C. Andersen, Rattle: A “velocity” version of the shake algorithm for molecular dynamics calculations, J. Comput. Phys 52 , 24 (1983). [123] W. Shinoda, M. Shiga, and M. Mikami, Rapid estimation of elastic constants by molecular dynamics simulation un-der constant stress, Phys. Rev. B 69 , 134103 (2004). [124] M. E. Tuckerman, J. Alejandre, R. L´ opez-Rend´ on, A. L. Jochim, and G. J. Martyna, A Liouville-operator derived measure-preserving integrator for molecular dynamics sim-ulations in the isothermal–isobaric ensemble, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39 , 5629 (2006). [125] A. P. Thompson, H. M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D. S. Bolin-tineanu, W. M. Brown, P. S. Crozier, P. J. in ’t Veld, A. Kohlmeyer, S. G. Moore, T. D. Nguyen, R. Shan, M. J. Stevens, J. Tranchida, C. Trott, and S. J. Plimpton, LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum scales, Comput. Phys. Commun 271 , 108171 (2022). [126] A. Singraber, J. Behler, and C. Dellago, Library-based LAMMPS implementation of high-dimensional neural net-14 

work potentials, J. Chem. Theory Comput 15 , 1827 (2019). [127] F. Chollet, Deep Learning with Python (Manning Publi-cations, 2017). [128] A. T. Bui, GCMC with Gaussian truncated potentials, 

https://github.com/annatbui/GCMC (2024). Supporting Information: A unified machine learning framework for 

# ab initio multiscale modeling of liquids 

Anna T. Bui 1, 2 and Stephen J. Cox 2, a) 

> 1)

Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB2 1EW, United Kingdom 

> 2)

Department of Chemistry, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, United Kingdom 

(Dated: March 20, 2026) 

S1. APPLICABILITY TO DIFFERENT MLIP ARCHITECTURES 

To generate the training data for the neural cDFT, we have employed MLIPs with the DeepMD 1 architecture for carbon dioxide with all xc functionals considered (PBE-D3, BLYP, SCAN-rVV10). We also used DeepMD for SCAN water. For RPBE-D3 water, we employed the HD-NNP 2 MLIP architecture. To gauge whether training with the random Vext is sensitive to the choice of MLIP architecture, we also trained an MLIP employing MACE 3 for PBE-D3 carbon dioxide, using the same dataset from Ref. 4 as for the DeepMD MLIP. As seen in Fig. S1, results obtained with MACE are virtually indistinguishable from those with DeepMD, suggesting that the generation of training data for neural cDFT is robust to any reasonable choice of MLIP architecture. 4

2

0

2

> Vext

T = 273.8 K 

A

T = 397.8 K T = 331.8 K 

0 1 2 3

z [nm] 

0

20 

40 

60 

> [nm  3]

B DeepMD 

> MACE

0 1 2 3

z [nm] 

0 1 2 3

z [nm] 

Figure S1: Robustness to choice of MLIP architecture. For random external potentials applied (A), the density profiles obtained from MD simulation (B) of PBE-D3 carbon dioxide are insensitive to the choice of DeepMD or MACE. 

> a) Electronic mail: stephen.j.cox@durham.ac.uk

S2  

> S2. MULTISCALE PREDICTION

The local nature of the trained neural functionals means that they are able to make efficient predictions on mesoscopic length scales. As an example, in Fig. S2 we present results for PBE-D3 carbon dioxide in which 

˛V ext (z) decreases linearly over 200 nm, along with 25 regions, each with a 1 eV bias of thickness 0.5 nm are added, separated from each other by 2 nm. It can clearly be seen that ab initio neural cDFT simultaneously describes the large length scale redistribution of the fluid and the fine microscopic structure. These results were obtained in approximately one hour on a GPU. 8

> 6
> 4
> ( Vext )

A        

> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200

z [nm] 

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> [nm  3]

B        

> 97 98 99 100 101
> 0
> 30
> Figure S2: Mesoscale prediction of PBE-D3 carbon dioxide. For carbon dioxide at T= 300 K distributed across a multilayered membrane, with a concentration gradient modeled through a linear bias component in the external potential in A, the density profile is shown in B.
> S3. ADDITIONAL RESULTS ACROSS INTERATOMIC POTENTIALS

Using neural cDFT, we show predictions across all interatomic potentials investigated for the equation of state, the structure factor and fluid structure under confinement. Results for water are shown in Fig. S3, and those for carbon dioxide in Fig. S4. S3 ABC

Figure S3: Ab initio structure and thermodynamics of water. Neural cDFT prediction for water described with the xc functionals RPBE-D3 and SCAN, and the TIP4P/2005 classical force field are shown with solid lines. A: The equation of state. B: The structure factor. C: The structure of the fluid confined between two graphene sheets. Where atomistic simulations have also been performed, we show the corresponding results with symbols. S4 ABC

Figure S4: Ab initio structure and thermodynamics of carbon dioxide. Neural cDFT prediction for carbon dioxide described with the xc functionals PBE-D3, SCAN-rVV10 and BLYP-D3, and the TraPPE classical force field are shown with solid lines. A: The equation of state. B: The structure factor. C: The structure of the fluid confined between two graphene sheets. Where atomistic simulations have also been performed, we show the corresponding results with symbols. S5  

> S4. THERMODYNAMICS OF CONFINED FLUIDS

In the main article, we consider single-component fluids confined between two graphene sheets separated by H. In the standard thermodynamic treatment of confined fluids, 5,6 the exact differential of the grand potential is dΩ = −SdT − P dV − Nd— + 2 ‚dA − ΠAdH′; (S1) where S is the entropy, Π is the disjoining pressure, P is the bulk pressure of the reservoir, and ‚ is the substrate–fluid interfacial tension. Note that H′ is defined by a reasonable choice of dividing surface; in general H′̸ = H. As V = AH ′, it immediately follows that 

− 1

A

„ @Ω

@H ′

«

> A;T;—

= P + Π; (S2) which we define as the effective pressure ˜P . Even though in general H′̸ = H, ˜P is insensitive to the precise choice of H′. This can be seen immediately by writing H′ = H + ‹H , such that d H′ = d H. For this reason, we adopt the simple choice H′ = H. 

> S5. ASSESSING THERMODYNAMIC CONSISTENCY

As discussed in the main article, there are two routes to calculating ˜ P . The thermodynamic route is ˜P = − 1

A

„ @Ω

@H 

«

> A;T;—

; (S3) and the structural route is ˜P = −

Z L

> 0

dz ȷ (z) dVwall (z)dz : (S4) That is, we can either calculate the derivative of the grand potential, or we can integrate ȷ(z)(d Vwall =dz). In principle, both approaches should give the same result. In Fig. S5A we show Ω vs. H for TraPPE carbon dioxide confined between two graphene sheets. In Fig. S5B, we compare the resulting ˜P to that presented in the main article, which were obtained by the structural route. At supercritical temperatures, we see that thermodynamic consistency is overall very good. At subcritical temperatures, more pronounced discrepancies are observed; this is due to an accumulation of numerical errors when integrating through intermediate densities in the van der Waals loop. 70.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 

H [nm] 

> 0.20
> 0.15
> 0.10
> /A [J nm  2]

A 300 K     

> 400 K
> 500 K
> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

H [nm] 

> 4
> 2
> 0
> 2
> 4
> P [10 3 atm]

B          

> L
> 0
> dz(z)(d Vwall /d z)
> ( ( /A)/ H)A,T,
> Figure S5: Assessing thermodynamic consistency in neural cDFT. A: Ω vs. Hfor TraPPE carbon dioxide confined between two graphene sheets. B: Resulting ˜Pcompared to results in the main article, which were obtained by the structural route.

S6 

S6. PHASE DIAGRAM 

In addition to the P –T phase diagram of confined water presented in Fig. 3 in the main paper, where P

is the bulk pressure of the reservoir, neural cDFT also allows construction of the ˜ P –T phase diagram, where ˜P = P + Π. We show this corresponding phase diagram in Fig. S6. 500 600 700 800 

T [K] 

10 1

10 2

10 3

> P [atm]
> SCF
> liquid
> gas
> bulk
> 1L
> 2L
> 3L
> 4L
> 5L

Figure S6: Phase diagram of SCAN water upon confinement between graphene sheets. Liquid–vapor phase diagram in the ˜P –T plane, for the different H indicated. S7 

S7. HYPER-DFT TO OBTAIN OTHER EQUILIBRIUM OBSERVABLES 

While cDFT provides structural information based on the one-body density ȷ, hyper-DFT 8 is a recent extension that states that any equilibrium observable of the fluid can be written as a functional of the one-body density (the “hyperdensity functional”). Here, as an example, we consider the density of the hydrogen atoms ȷH in water as the observable of interest; recall that we use the oxygen position to define the one-body density ȷ. For an inhomogeneous fluid, once the equilibrium density ȷ(z) is determined from solving the Euler–Lagrange equation, the equilibrium hydrogen density can be obtained by evaluating 

ȷH(z) = ȷ(1) H (z; [ ȷ]; T ); (S5) where ȷ(1) H (z; [ %]; T ) is the corresponding hyperdensity functional. To obtain a neural functional representation of ȷ(1) H (z; [ ȷ]; T ), for each training simulation, we sample not only the equilibrium one-body density ȷ(z) centered on the oxygen atoms but also the equilibrium hydrogen density ȷH(z). Then the mapping {ȷ(z); T } → ȷH(z) is learned locally with a neural network, analogous to the training of c(1) (z; [ ȷ]; T ) (see Methods section in the main paper). The prediction of the hydrogen density for confined water described with the SCAN xc functional is shown in Fig. S7. 0

50 

100  

> [nm  3]
> H
> O
> =3.56

0 1 2

z [nm] 

0

50 

100  

> [nm  3]
> =6.08

0

50  

> [nm  3]
> =7.18

0

50  

> [nm  3]
> =7.48

0 1 2

z [nm] 

0

20  

> [nm  3]
> =7.54

Figure S7: Water’s hydrogen atom density profiles obtained with hyper-DFT. For SCAN water confined between two graphene sheets at different chemical potentials at T = 700 K, we show the oxygen atom density profiles ȷH = ȷ

obtained from neural cDFT (dashed blue line) and hydrogen atom density profiles ȷO obtained from neural hyper-DFT (solid gray line), in good agreement with MD simulation (symbols). 

REFERENCES 

> 1

L. Zhang, J. Han, H. Wang, R. Car, and W. E, “Deep potential molecular dynamics: A scalable model with the accuracy of quantum mechanics,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 , 143001 (2018). 

> 2

J. Behler and M. Parrinello, “Generalized neural-network representation of high-dimensional potential-energy surfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 , 146401 (2007). 

> 3

I. Batatia, D. P. Kovacs, G. Simm, C. Ortner, and G. Csanyi, “MACE: Higher order equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , Vol. 35, edited by S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (Curran Associates, Inc., 2022) pp. 11423–11436. 

> 4

R. Mathur, M. C. Muniz, S. Yue, R. Car, and A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, “First-principles-based machine learning models for phase behavior and transport properties of CO 2,” J. Phys. Chem. B 127 , 4562–4569 (2023). 

> 5

J. Hansen and I. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liquids: with Applications to Soft Matter (Elsevier Science, 2013). 

> 6

R. Evans and U. Marini Bettolo Marconi, “Phase equilibria and solvation forces for fluids confined between parallel walls,” J. Chem. Phys 86 , 7138–7148 (1987). 

> 7

F. Samm¨ uller, M. Schmidt, and R. Evans, “Neural density functional theory of liquid-gas phase coexistence,” Phys. Rev. X 15 ,011013 (2025). 

> 8

F. Samm¨ uller, S. Robitschko, S. Hermann, and M. Schmidt, “Hyperdensity functional theory of soft matter,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 

133 , 098201 (2024).